---
layout: post
title: Others
categories: [Obscura]
---

Just notes. Nothing to see here

* Table of content
{:toc}

## Intro

- Strange Case of Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde
- 1886
- Gothic horror, science fiction novella
- Scottish author Robert Louis Stevenson

## Character sketches

**Dr. Henry Jekyll**

- 50 yr old
- Respectable doctor
- Amiable personality
- Repressed urges
- Not a morally good person

**Mr. Edward Hyde**

- Alt persona of Jekyll
- Reckless, cruel and passionate
- Dwarfish stature
- Wears clothes that are too big for him

**Mr. Poole**

- Dr. Jekyll's butler
- Cares for Jekyll more than his life
- Fears Jekyll's reclusiveness

**Mr. Gabriel John Utterson**

- Emotionless bachelor
- Quick to judge others
- Hates indulgence

**Dr. Hastie Lanyon**

- Jekyll's close friend, denounces him later
- Disagrees with Jekyll's scientific concepts
- Dies from critical illness after Jekyll's confession

**Sir Danvers Carew**

- 70 yr old MP
- Murdered with a cane by Hyde

**Mr. Richard Enfield**

- Utterson's cousin
- Socialite

## Summary

Utterson and Enfield walk through a crowded London street and see a cellar door. Enfield recalls a night [at 3 AM] when a disfigured man runs a car over a child and paid 10 pounds of gold and check, signed by Jekyll on behalf of Hyde, as compensation.

Dr. Jekyll's will states that in case of death or disappearance, his possessions are to be given to Mr. Hyde. Utterson goes to Dr. Lanyon who doesn't see Jekyll anymore and doesn't know who's Hyde. So he confronts Hyde and introduces himself as Jekyll's friend. He notices that Jekyll's house is connected to the cellar door.

A fortnight later, Dr. Jekyll hosts a dinner party. He tells Utterson that he pities Hyde and urges him to take care of him when he's gone.

A year later, a maid witnesses Hyde beating Danvers to death with a cane. He carried a purse, some gold and a letter to Utterson thanking Jekyll for his kindness.

Utterson meets Dr. Jekyll at his lab. He swears he's not hiding Hyde and that he is no longer close to him. Even Poole tells Utterson that nothing suspicious was delivered that day.

Utterson receives a dinner invitation from Jekyll in January. It has the same handwriting as the letter recovered from Danvers.

After that, Lanyon suffers from a shock and doesn't wish to speak of Jekyll again. He then dies, leaving Utterson a letter with instructions.

Enfield and Utterson spot Jekyll, who had suffered from seizures. He advices him to not go out.

Poole contacts Utterson as he believes Jekyll is dead and that the murdered is hiding in Jekyll's cabinet. Jekyll begged him for white salts every night.

Lanyon discovers a salt, a red liquid concoction and a notebook and takes it home. At midnight, Hyde visits him whom Lanyon doesn't know. He experiments with the mixture and drinks the potion to turn into Jekyll.

Jekyll confesses to Utterson that he had been living 2 lives and that he wished to separate them at adulthood. At times he transformed into Hyde involuntarily. He had to take double doses of the potion every 6 hours to avoid that.
