---
layout: post
title: Object-Oriented Programming
categories: [Programming Concepts]
---

One of the most important programming paradigms in use today...

* Table of content
{:toc}

Object-oriented programming is used to design a program using classes and objects. Now let's see what are they.

## Class

A **class** is a blueprint for an object instantiated from it. It defines the what type of object can be created from it as well as its state and actions.

> Mansion, apartment, bungalow, etc. are the instances [or objects, since they're the same thing] of the class House with attributes such as wall-colour, roof, building materials, BHK, etc.

## Object

**Object** is an instance of a class. A very confusing definition; let's elaborate it further:

Object is a way by which we can introduce a class in our program and access its features.

Its state and actions performed are defined by its attributes and methods respectively.

### Attributes

**Attributes** are information related to the object. Since their values can change and they affect an instance, we call these **instance variables**.

The state of an object is the value of its instance [or internal] variables at any given point of time.

> Fun fact : Object and instance are the **very same thing**! Colour me confused...
> 
> Here's why -> [r/learnprogramming](<https://www.reddit.com/r/learnprogramming/comments/pp9cx2/an_object_is_an_instance_of_a_class_what_is_it/>)

### Methods

**Methods** are code written inside a class that are given a name and can be called using the object [after instantiation]. They specify **what an object does**.

### Constructor

It is a special method that creates an object from its instance variables.
