---
layout: post
title: CSS - Units
categories: [CSS]
---

There exist units other than pixels that we haven't yet looked into...

* Table of content
{:toc}

## CSS data-type

[Referring : [CSS Data Types | Codeguage](https://www.codeguage.com/courses/css/data-types)]

Every property in CSS requires a certain set of values.

Example, ``background-color`` can handle only values as such ``rgb()``, hex-codes, etc. while ``font-family`` will only accept font names as values.

These 'certain values' are called the property's **data-type**. They're enclosed in angular brackets [these < >].

We can write them as :

* ``<color>`` -> Representing name of colours
* ``<length>`` -> Various units of length
* ``<angle>`` -> Degrees, radians, etc.

And so on.

> Do *not* confuse <color> with color! The former is a data-type; the latter is a property.

[Referring : [CSS - Data Types | Tutorialspoint](https://www.tutorialspoint.com/css/css_data_types.htm)]

We formally represent a property using these data types [with their brackets, of course] to show the values allowed with it.

```css
selector
{
    property : <data-type>;
}
```

### Numerical data types

* `<integer>` - Any whole number
* `<number>` - Any decimal [or even non-decimal] number
* `<dimension>` - `<number>` with an unit attached to it
* `<percentage>` - Percentage, i.e. fraction of a value

### Lengths data types

[Referring : [CSS Units - Scaler](https://www.scaler.com/topics/css/css-units/)]

There are two types of lengths found in CSS :

* **Relative** : Values will change depending on some other length property; dimensions will adjust as per screen size
* **Absolute** : Values are fixed regardless of other factors; dimensions won't change even if the screen were resized

``px`` is the most widely used absolute unit. The rest [cm, in, mm, etc.] are used in prints, but even there, pixel reigns supreme.

``em``'s value is dependent on the ``font-size`` of the element.

Let's look at this snippet below :

```css
.container
{
    font-size : 20px;
    background-color: green;
    width: 2em;
}
```

The value of 1 `em` will be 20px since the value of ``font-size`` here is 20px as well. Therefore, ``width`` of this element will be 40px.

Whereas ``rem`` depends on the ``font-size`` of the ``root`` element.

```css
:root
{
font-size: 16px;
}
.container
{
    font-size : 20px;
    background-color: green;
    width: 2rem;
}
```

Now, the ``root`` element is a pseudo-class representing the `<html>` tag [hence its name]. We can also swap it for ``html`` selector.

It has the ``font-size`` property of 16px.

Therefore ``rem``'s value is also 16px, making the ``width`` be equal to 32px.

``vh`` is relative to the viewport's height while ``vw`` is relative to the viewport's width.
