---
layout: post
title: Java - I
categories: [Java, Lecture Notes]
---

Here's my revision notes for Java...

* Table of content
{:toc}

## Characteristics of Java

### Simplicity & Familiarity

Anyone who has experience in C++ and C# will find Java easier to adapt to than Python or JS.

### Security features

Java has public and private class features to prevent someone making unnecessary changes to the main program.

### How does Java run our program?

When we compile our program [written in Java, of course], it is converted from **Java to bytecode**, then it is interpreted and converted to machine code. After that, we get the same process as our other languages have - machine code to output.

Let's not confuse bytecode with machine code [which is also known as binary].

### Bytecode?

**Bytecode** is the middleman involved in converting source code to binary. It depends on a virtual machine to be executed. In Java, we've the Java Virtual Machine [or JVM].

> A **virtual machine** is something that uses software to run programs using resources we allocate to it. It is like having a second OS in one's computer.

### Robustness

In any programming language, **garbage** are unreferenced [or unused] objects. These may even be unused variables.

These garbage tend to take up memory space and it is necessary to destroy them if their life-time is ending or if they're never referenced anywhere in the program.

Garbage collection is a process where we free our memory by destroying them while the program's running on JVM.

### OOPS

Java is often chosen by people to learn Object-Oriented Programming. This is because no other language involves making a class and creating objects for very simple programs.

## Type conversion and casting

### Type conversion

It is when we convert the type of a variable to another.

#### Implicit conversion / widening

```java
int a = 10;
float b = a;
```

#### Explicit conversion / narrowing

```java
double x = 2.45;
int y = (int) x;
```

### Type casting
