---
layout: post
title: Java - Lists
categories: [Java]
---

ArrayList is a handy, modern tool used in Java. Here's how we use it...

* Table of content
{:toc}

## ArrayList

**Lists** in Java can be created using the utility ``ArrayList``. To use it in our program, we import it and then create an object of its class.

While creating the ``ArrayList`` object, we specify the type of elements we'd store in it along with its name.

```java
import java.util.ArrayList;

public class Test
{
	public static void main(String[] args)
	{
		ArrayList <String> list = new ArrayList<>();
	}
}
```

## Operations

We can perform the following operations using our ``ArrayList`` object in Java :

* ``add(itemName)`` : Adds an items to the list
* ``remove(index)`` : Removes the item located at index in the list
* ``remove(dataType.valueOf(itemName))`` : Removes the item from list
* ``get(index)`` : Returns the item located at index in list
* ``indexOf(itemName)`` : Returns the index of the first occurrence of item in list
* ``size()`` : Returns the size of the list
* ``contains(itemName)`` : Checks if a value exists in a list or not. Returns a Boolean value depending on it.

> >If we try to retrieve information from a non-existent place, `IndexOutOfBoundsException` error occurs. It often happens when we retrieve beyond the size of a list.
>
>**Remember :** Index always starts from 0, not 1!

## References

A **reference** is the value of a list variable that points to the location that contains that information.

When a method copies a list for its own usage [we do this by adding it to its parameters], it receives the references from the list's copy, and thus, **reference to the real value of a reference-type variable** as well.

Using this, the method can modify the value of the original variable [here, its the list]. The list used as parameter for a method is the same list used in program to call that method.

### Variable types

Variables in Java are divided into 2 categories :
* Value type [primitive] : These hold their actual values
* Reference type : Contain a reference to the location that contains the value[s] relating to that variable

Hence, when we create a list, `ArrayList` assumes that all the variables contained in it are reference types.

## Iterating an ArrayList object

### For loop

To iterate an ``ArrayList`` object, we could use a for-loop.

A flaw with this method is that we'll have to keep track of the list index while iterating [plus un-needed complexity for such a simple action].

```java
//assume we've created an ArrayList object
//of type String named brands
for (int i=0; i<brands.size();i++)
{
	System.out.println(i);
}
```

### While loop

Or, we could even go for a while loop - an even lengthier option!

```java
//assume we've created an ArrayList object
//of type String named brands
int i = 0;
while (i<brands.size())
{
	String name = brands.get(i);
	System.out.println(name);
	i++;
}
```

### For-each loop

Or, we could go for an easier method by using **for-each loop**. It acts like a for-loop where we print each item of a list, except it doesn't require you to use its index.

We mainly use it if we want to display every item in a list.

```java
//assume we've created an ArrayList object
//of type String named brands
for (String i:list)
{
	System.out.println(i);
}
```
