---
layout: post
title: JS - OOPs
categories: [JS]
---

We shall look into what an object is in JS...

* Table of content
{:toc}

## Object

> Refer -> [My notes on OOP, in case you don't know what an object is](2024-06-17-oop.md) and [notes on data types in JS](2024-09-08-js-dtypes.md)

Objects are the representation of real-world objects in the virtual world. In JS, they belong to a type called `object`.

### Creating an object

Objects can be created in 2 ways :

* Using an object initializer [highly recommended]
* Using `new`

#### Object literals

Object is a collection of key-value pairs. These pairs represent an object's properties [in other languages, we call them instance variables].

> If you've dabbled in python before, you must be familiar with dictionaries. What we're going to do now resembles them.

Let's say I'm making a character for Project Zomboid...

```js
const player = {
    name: "Jean Antonique",
    job: "Ranger",
    traitsStengths: ["Outdoorsman", "Axe Man", ""],
    traitsWeakness: ["Thin-skinned", "Fear of Blood", ""],
    //...
    mainWeapon: "Axe"
};
```

If we want to create an object, we don't declare any properties :

```js
const playerTwo = {};
```

Let's try printing the object :

```js
console.log(player);

/*
{
  name: 'Jean Antonique',
  job: 'Ranger',
  ...
  mainWeapon: 'Axe'
}
*/
```

Aww man! We don't need the EXACT thing we declare just moments ago!

This literal consists of putting info. in a key:value pair-basis [that is, we have a name and a value attached to it].

Let's fill in the blanks :

```js
const song = {
    songName: "",
    artist: "",
    genre: "",
    rating: 0
};

const prompt = require("prompt-sync")({sigint:true});

song.songName =  prompt("Song: ");
song.artist = prompt("Artist: ");
song.genre = prompt("Genre: ");
song.rating = prompt("Rate this song: ");
```

We've created an object `song` with blank fields. Since the object's values are created blank, we prompt the user using the object and the key [like `object.name` or `object.key`] to enter input.

Then we simply return the object as output.

```js
console.log(song);
/*
{
  songName: 'Good Grief',
  artist: 'Bastille',
  genre: 'Pop',
  rating: '7'
}
*/
```

Probably not a good idea to print the object as it is and rather use a function to print it neatly.

The next method we could use is `new` [just like our arrays!] :

```js
const song = new Object();
```

Then we can add new properties to this object.

I'd say, try using the object initializer way more than this as you'll not have to face the hassle of adding properties [while in the former, you can either start blank or with properties].

### Adding details to our object

Remember our previous code on object initializer? Maybe we could revamp and make it better.

To start with, let's create an empty object and then add properties to it :

```js
const song = {};

const prompt = require("prompt-sync")({sigint:true});

song.songName =  prompt("Song: ");
song.artist = prompt("Artist: ");
song.genre = prompt("Genre: ");
song.rating = prompt("Rate this song: ");

console.log(song);
```

The names used with the object name [for example, `songName` is a name used with object `song`] will be the names of the property.

### Methods

Methods are functions used with an object.

```js

```
